Revocation request flow and Non-Revocation Attestation issuance flow (#143)
italia/eidas-it-wallet-docs: docs/en/revocation-lists.rst

- The PID/(Q)EAA Provider MUST provide to the Holder the non-revocations attestation related to the digital credential it has issued to the Holder.
- The Non-Revocation Attestation provides the proof about the non-revocation of the digital credential which is related to.
- The Non-Revocation Attestation MUST be verifiable with a cryptographic signature.
- The Non-Revocation Attestation does not reveal any information about the Relying Party or the User's data contained in the digital credential the attestation is related to.

Entities Involved in the Revocation Flows
-----------------------------------------

TBD.

High Level Revocation Flow
--------------------------

TBD.

All the flows and use cases not defind in the subsequent section is considered out of scope for this technical implementation profile.

Revocation Wallet Instance Request
----------------------------------

.. code-block:: mermaid

    sequenceDiagram
        participant WalletInstance as Wallet Instance
        participant digital credentialIssuer as PID/(Q)EAA Provider

>         WalletInstance->>digital credentialIssuer: Send Non-Revocation Attestation Request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        WalletInstance->>digital credentialIssuer: Send Revocation Attestation Request
```

The "Key Technical Requirements" subsection outlines the fundamental requirements for managing credential validity and revocation. These requirements define the roles and responsibilities of the Authentic Source, the Issuer, and the Wallet Instance in ensuring the validity of credentials and managing their revocation.

The "Presentation" and "Issuance" subsections describe the processes by which a Wallet Instance responds to a presentation request and initiates a request for a digital credential, respectively. These subsections detail how a non-revocation attestation, a proof that the credential has not been revoked, is created, presented, and validated.

The "Non-Revocation Attestation Renewal Flow" and "Credential Revocation Flow" subsections provide detailed workflows for renewing a non-revocation attestation and revoking a credential, respectively. These workflows include the generation and verification of a Proof of Possession (PoP) JWT, which proves that the Wallet Instance possesses the private key associated with the VC.

Key Technical Requirements
---------------------------

> - The Authentic Source MUST be the only source of truth for credential validity. All revocation requests MUST be communicated to the Authentic Source using appropriate channels. These requests MAY come from:

Reviewer 2: > All revocation requests MUST be communicated to the Authentic Source

This comes with several implications:
1. Issuer MUST refer to an Authentic Source when issuing every credential
2. Authentic Sources MUST be known to Users, and there's a direct interaction between them
3. Authentic Sources MUST be trusted entities in the ecosystem

    - The citizen (Holder) via their personal Wallet Instance.
    - The citizen via a legal entity (e.g., Police for reporting).
    - The citizen directly via the Authentic Source.
    - The Authentic Source itself (e.g., for attribute updates).
    - A legal entity (e.g., Police for seizure).
- The Authentic Source MUST maintain a record of the issuers who have issued a certain credential. 
- The Issuer MUST provide information about a callback hook for revocation.
- The Authentic Source MUST manage the revocation of issued credentials by notifying the respective issuers.
- The Authentic Source MUST maintain a mapping between ID_CREDENTIAL and ID_ISSUER to facilitate credential revocation even in case of Wallet Instance loss.
- The revocation MUST be verifiable via a cryptographic signature.

Presentation
------------

The Wallet Instance responds to a presentation request from the Relying Party. It produces a Verifiable Presentation (VP) token with the digital credential and a non-revocation attestation. This attestation is a proof that the credential has not been revoked.

> It is timestamped with the request date and always refers to a previous period. Importantly, this attestation does not reveal any information about the Relying Party. The Relying Party then evaluates and validates the response, the VP token, and the non-revocation attestation.

Reviewer 2: > always refers to a previous period

I don't understand what it means, sorry. Can you please expand?

Issuance
--------

The Wallet Instance initiates a request for a digital credential from the Credential Issuer.

Upon successful request, the Wallet Instance receives:
- The digital credential
- A non-revocation attestation

The non-revocation attestation is presented in conjunction with the credential. The attestation is timestamped with the request date, not the authentication date, and always refers to a previous period.
Relying Parties determine the validity duration of this attestation based on the specific use case.

> By default, an attestation is considered valid if issued within the previous 350 hours. This provision supports offline use cases and potential disruptions or incidents in the certification systems. Note that this delay only refers to the non-revocation of the credential, while the validity of the credential itself can always be verified.

Reviewer 2: > By default, an attestation is considered valid if issued within the previous 350 hours

It means a credential revocation takes up to 6 days to be propagated in the system. 

Besides the value itself, it's substantially a _cache_ needed to optimize traffic load, right?

Author: It's to avoid potentially disastrous consequences due to unforeseen downtime: if non-revocation attestations can't be refreshed, we still want to have a grace period.

.. include:: ../common/common_definitions.rst

.. _sec_revocation_intro:

Credential Revocations
++++++++++++++++++++++

> The value of digital credentials is contingent on their validity.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The value of Digital Credentials is contingent on their validity.
```

A credential that has been revoked, due to legal requirements, inaccuracy or compromise, is not only valueless but potentially harmful. 

> For these reasons a robust mechanism for managing the validity and revocation of digital credentials is required.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For these reasons a robust mechanism for managing the validity and revocation of Digital Credentials is required.
```

> This section outlines the key technical requirements and processes related to the revocation of the digital credentials. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section outlines the key technical requirements and processes related to the revocation of the Digital Credentials. 
```

then in all the specs we shoudl aling this term, I assume. 

@fmarino-ipzs @ruphy ^

Furthermore, it provides the technical details that the Relying Parties MUST implement to verify, in a secure and reliable manner, 

> the validity of a digital credential during the presentation phase.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the validity of a Digital Credential during the presentation phase.
```

* The :ref:`"Non-Revocation Proof during the Presentation Phase" <sec_revocation_nra_presentation>` subsection details how a Non-Revocation Attestation, in the form of a cryptographic proof that the credential has not been revoked, is provided by the Wallet Instance to the Verifier requesting a credential.

.. _sec_revocation_assumption:

General Assumptions
-------------------

A Credential Issuer is in charge of the creation and the issuance of credentials, its lifecycle, and ultimately, its validity status. Some credentials may have regulatory value given by national or european laws, therefore also revocations of credentials MUST be non-repudiable.
Some credentials may be a digital representation of a physical document issued, under a well defined national law, by an Authentic Source which, in the Wallet Ecosystem, acts as a repository or system that contains attributes and provides them to the Issuer. For this reason, an exchange of information between the two entities is required not only for the issuing the credential but also for the proper handling of its revocation.
Moreover, due to digital signature of the credentials, any updates on them MUST result in a re-issuance.

> Finally, it is assumed that, to facilitate the association between physical document and digital credentials, the identifier of the physical document is always present as an attribute within the digital credentials.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, it is assumed that, to facilitate the association between physical document and digital credentials, the identifier of the physical document is always present as an attribute within the Digital Credentials.
```

.. _sec_revocation_requirements:

Requirements
------------

General Requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
 
- The Issuer MUST be the only responsible for the lifecycle of credentials including the revocation status.

> - Credentials SHOULD be updates whenever one or more attributes are changed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Credentials SHOULD be updated whenever one or more attributes are changed.
```

- Any credential update MUST result in a new fresh issuance of it, following the principle that the credential SHOULD always have updated data. In this case, the old Credentials of the same type MUST be revoked. 

> - The revocation of a credential for technical reasons (loss or theft of the device, compromise of cryptographic keys) MAY not have an impact on any other digital credentials issued of the same type and MUST NOT lead to the revocation of a physical document associated with it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The revocation of a credential for technical reasons (loss or theft of the device, compromise of cryptographic keys) MAY not have an impact on any other Digital Credentials issued of the same type and MUST NOT lead to the revocation of a physical document associated with it.
```

- The revocation of a physical document which one or more Credentials are associated with MUST result in their revocation.

> - The revocation requests of a credential MAY be communicated to the Issuer by 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The revocation requests of a credential MAY be communicated to the Issuer by: 
```

    - Holders using their personal Wallet Instance.
    - Authentic Sources (e.g., for attribute updates) following administrative purposes. 
    - Law-Enforcing Bodies for the fulfillment of their functions and any other judicial reasons (e.g., Police).
- The revocation requests of a physical document MAY be communicated to Authentic Source by:

    - A Law-Enforcing Body (e.g., Police) on behalf of the User or directly for the fulfillment of their functions and any other judicial reasons.
    - The Holder using any out-of-band procedure in force by national regulations.

> - The Authentic Source MUST provide an interface for the data sharing regarding the attributes update and revocation status of a physical document the credential is associated with.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The Authentic Source MUST provide an interface for the data provisioning regarding the attributes update and revocation status of a physical document the credential is associated with.
```

- Access to credential status information by a Verifier MUST be authorized by the Holder, except for checks carried out by Law-Enforcement Bodies on a regulatory basis. 
- The Issuer SHOULD not directly or indirectly have any information related to the Verifier, type of credentials, and Holder such that it is impossible to track the Holder's usage of the Credentials.
- A proof of non-revocation (Non-Revocation Attestation) provided by the Issuer, in whatever format it is, SHOULD NOT reveal any information about the Verifier nor the User's attributes contained in the credential the attestation is related to.

.. _sec_revocation_entity_relationship:

Entities Relationship
---------------------

The entities involved in the main revocation processes are depicted in the diagram below. 

.. _fig_revocation_entity_relationship:
.. figure:: ../../images/revocation-entity-relationship.svg
    :figwidth: 80%
    :align: center

    Entity-Relationship diagram in the revocation scenario

The revocation scenarios involve two main flows:

    - The Revocation Request flow: this flow describes how an entity requests for a credential revocation to the Issuer of that credential. 

>     - The Non-Revocation Attestation Request flow: this flow defines the technical protocol for requesting and obtaining a Non-Revocation Attestation and how the Wallet Instance will share it with a Verifier as a proof of validity of a credential.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - The Non-Revocation Attestation Request flow: this flow defines the technical protocol for requesting and obtaining a Non-Revocation Attestation and how the Wallet Instance will provide it with a Verifier as a proof of validity of a credential.
```

.. _sec_revocation_high_level_flow:

High Level Revocation Flow
--------------------------

A Credential Revocation Flow can start under different scenarios:

    - The Holders report the loss or theft of their own physical document to the Law-Enforcement Authorities: this implies that the credentials, if any, shall be revoked.

>     - The Holders notify an Authentic Source that one or more attributes are changed (e.g. the current resident address): in this case the Credentials shall be revoked, as they are no longer valid due to the change in attributes. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - The Holders notify an Authentic Source that one or more attributes are changed (e.g. the current resident address): in this case the Credentials SHALL be revoked, as they are no longer valid due to the change in attributes. 
```

    - The Holders who no longer have access to their Wallet Instance (e.g. theft or loss of the device), may request the Issuer of the credentials to revoke them.
    - The Law-Enforcing Authorities, for the fulfillment of their functions and any other judicial reasons, may request the Authentic Source to revoke entitlements, licences, certificates, identification documents, etc., which in turn leads to the revocation of any linked Credentials.

>     - The Authentic Sources that for any administrative reasons update one or more attributes of a Holder, shall inform the Issuer of related Credentials. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - The Authentic Sources that for any administrative reasons update one or more attributes of a Holder, SHALL inform the Issuer of related Credentials. 
```

    - The Issuers, for technical security reasons (e.g. in the case of compromised cryptographic keys), can decide to revoke the Credentials.

> The Figure below shows the main processes involved in the scenarios described above

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Figure below shows the main processes involved in the scenarios described above.
```

    :target: https://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/svg/PP11ImD134Rlyoj2yQ1WyIvKAfxgPGSjxaLOucw4q6bcd6HSlFZRZHLRnEjx7xoGjHfMQ_iKi5cMjd-X6eeZ7hcW62nwJ8aCDk9B6Ma1g33ptyr6jL4zA0vXPbZU05z3x1wtS5NfFUy8AhqrKZiVAqqanfY6KdD-NPtT7KdCyRxVNiAOsC60gkILB8Dz5FgFL_tczZDsyIBy5fymyOH6u6Rf1fu5PO9J0HmUrmy_bvtijt4r7voMB4hGxSAQPF8NVG40
    
    Wallet Instance Initiated Revocation Flow

**Step 1 (Credential Revocation Request)**: The Wallet Instance initiates the process by creating a Credential Revocation Request. This request includes the Wallet Instance Attestation with its Proof of Possession and a Credential Proof of Possession as a JWT. It MUST be signed with the private key related to the public key contained within the credential (Issuer Signed JWT). Then, the Wallet Instance sends the request to the Issuer as in the following non-normative example.

.. _credential_revocation_request_ex:
.. code-block::
    
    POST /revoke HTTP/1.1
    Host: pid-provider.example.org
    Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

    credential_proof=$CredentialPoPJWT
    &client_assertion_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-client-attestation
    &client_assertion=$WIA~WIA-PoP

> where a non-normative example of a Credential PoP JWT is given by

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
where a non-normative example of a Credential PoP is given by the following JWT headers and payload
```

    * - **iss**
      - Thumbprint of the JWK in the ``cnf`` parameter of the Wallet Instance Attestation.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **aud**
      - It MUST be set to the identifier of the Issuer.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **exp**
      - UNIX Timestamp with the expiry time of the JWT.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **iat**
      - UNIX Timestamp with the time of JWT issuance.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **jti**
      - Unique identifier for the PoP proof JWT. The value SHOULD be set using a *UUID v4* value according to [:rfc:`4122`].
      - [:rfc:`7519`. Section 4.1.7].
    * - **credential_format**
      - The data format of the credential to be revoked. It MUST be set to ``vc+sd-jwt`` or ``vc+mdoc``
      - This specification.
    * - **credential**
      - It MUST contain the credential to be revoked encoded according to the data format given in the ``credential_format`` claim.
      - [:rfc:`7519`. Section 4.1.7].

Credential Revocation HTTP Response
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

TBD.

.. _sec_revocation_nra_request:

Non-Revocation Attestation Request
----------------------------------

> The presentation of a credential to a Verifier may occur long after it has been issued by the Issuer. During this time interval, the credential can be invalidated for any reason and therefore the Verifier also needs to verify its revocation or suspension status. To address this scenario, the Issuer provides the Wallet Instance with a *Non-Revocation Attestation*. This Attestation is bound to a credential so that the Wallet Instance can share it to a Verifier, along with the credential itself, as a proof of non-revocation status of the credential.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The presentation of a credential to a Verifier may occur long after it has been issued by the Issuer. During this time interval, the credential can be invalidated for any reason and therefore the Verifier also needs to verify its revocation or suspension status. To address this scenario, the Issuer provides the Wallet Instance with a *Non-Revocation Attestation*. This Attestation is bound to a credential so that the Wallet Instance can present it to a Verifier, along with the credential itself, as a proof of non-revocation status of the credential.
```

.. include:: ../common/common_definitions.rst

.. _sec_revocation_intro:

Credential Lifecycle
++++++++++++++++++++

The value of a Digital Credential is conditional on its validity. A Credential that has been revoked, due to legal requirements, inaccuracy or compromise, is valueless and potentially harmful. 
For these reasons a robust mechanism for managing the life-cycle and the revocation of a Digital Credential is required.

This section outlines the key technical requirements and processes related to the revocation of Digital Credentials. 
Furthermore, it provides the technical details that the Verifiers MUST implement to verify, in a secure and reliable manner, the validity of a Digital Credential during the presentation phase.

> The verification of the validity of a Digital Credential is based on the `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 00] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-attestations/00/>`_ specification. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The verification of the validity of a Digital Credential is based on the `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_ specification. 
```

Reviewer 3: since in 01 we have the credential_pop

Reviewer 4: yes, I changed also the url to point to 01

> A Status Attestation is a signed object that is evidence of the validity status of a Digital Credential. The Issuer provides these attestations to Holders who can present them to Verifiers together with the corresponding Digital Credentials. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Status Attestation is a signed document serving as proof of a Digital Credential's current validity status. The Issuer provides these attestations to Holders who can present them to Verifiers together with the corresponding Digital Credentials. 
```

Generally, the Status Attestation enables:

> - an entirely automated issuance flow, as the User authentication is not required; 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- an entirely automated issuance flow, as the User authentication is not required for the provisioning of the Status Attestation; 
```

> - verification of the digital Credential validity status when both the Wallet Instance and the Verifier are offline;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- verification of the Digital Credential validity status in both online and offline scenarios;
```

> - improved privacy, according to the following evidences:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- privacy-preserving, according to the following evidences:
```

  1. the Verifier cannot check over time the validity of a given  Digital Credential related to the User;

>   2. the Issuers cannot track when and where a Digital Credential is verified.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  2. the Issuers cannot track when and where a Digital Credential is verified;
```

> Generally, the Status Attestation enables:
> 
> - an entirely automated issuance flow, as the User authentication is not required for the provisioning of the Status Attestation; 
> - the verification of the digital Credential validity status when both the Wallet Instance and the Verifier are offline;
> - better privacy of the User since:
> 
>   1. the Verifier cannot check over time the validity of a given  Digital Credential related to the User;
>   2. it prevents issuers to track when and where a Digital Credential is verified.
>   3. it doesn't reveal any information about the Users or the content of their Digital Credentials.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Status Attestations have the following features:

- automated issuance, as the User authentication is not required for the provisioning of the Status Attestation; 
- verification of the digital Credential validity status when both the Wallet Instance and the Verifier are offline;
- improved privacy, according to the following evidences:

  1. the Verifier cannot check over time the validity of a given  Digital Credential related to the User;
  2. the Issuers cannot track when and where a Digital Credential is verified.
  3. it doesn't reveal any information about the Users or the content of their Digital Credentials.
```

.. _sec_revocation_assumption:

> General Assumptions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Operational Requirements
```
The statements provided are not merely assumptions; they outline operational requirements and roles within a digital credentialing ecosystem

-------------------

>   - All the Status Attestations can only be acquired when the Wallet Instance has an internet connection and is actively executed by the User.
>   - A Credential Issuer, is in charge of the creation and the issuance of Credentials, its lifecycle and its validity status. 
>   - When one or more Authentic Sources are involved in the issuance of a Digital Credential, the information exchanged between the Authentic Source and the PID/(Q)EAA Provider is required for the issuance of the Credential and, in the cases where the revocation is requested by the Authentic Source, also for the the revocation of the Credential.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Internet Connection for Status Attestations**: Status Attestations can be obtained only when the Wallet Instance is connected to the internet and actively operated by the User.
- **Role of a Credential Issuer**: A Credential Issuer is responsible for creating and issuing Credentials, as well as managing their lifecycle and validity status.
- **Involvement of Authentic Sources**: When one or more Authentic Sources are involved in the issuance of a Digital Credential, the information exchanged between the Authentic Source and the PID/(Q)EAA Provider is crucial for the credential's issuance. Furthermore, in cases where the Authentic Source initiates a revocation or data changes, revoking the Credential becomes necessary.
```

> - **Involvement of Authentic Sources**: When one or more Authentic Sources are involved in the issuance of a Digital Credential, the information exchanged between the Authentic Source and the PID/(Q)EAA Provider is crucial for the credential's issuance. Furthermore, in cases where the Authentic Source initiates a revocation or data changes, revoking the Credential becomes necessary.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- **Involvement of Authentic Sources**: When one or more Authentic Sources are involved in the issuance of a Digital Credential, the information exchanged between the Authentic Source and the Credential Issuer is crucial for the Digital Credential's issuance. Furthermore, in cases where the Authentic Source initiates a revocation or data changes, revoking the Digital Credential becomes necessary.
```

.. _sec_revocation_requirements:

> Requirements

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Functional Requirements
```

------------

**The Status Attestation MUST:**

- be presented in conjunction with the Digital Credential; 
- be timestamped with the issuance datetime;

> - contain the expiration datetime after which it SHOULD NOT be considered valid anymore and it MUST NOT be greater the one contained in the digital Credential which it refers to;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- contain the expiration datetime after which it SHOULD NOT be considered valid anymore and it MUST NOT be greater than the one contained in the Digital Credential which it refers to;
```

- have a validity period not greater than 24 hours;

> - provides the proof about the non-revocation of the digital Credential which is related to and MUST be validated using the cryptographic signature of the Issuer;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- provide the proof about the non-revocation of the Digital Credential which is related to and MUST be validated using the cryptographic signature of the Issuer;
```

> - not reveal any information about the Relying Party, the User's device or the User's data contained in the digital Credential the attestation is related to;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- not reveal any information about the Relying Party, the User's device or the User's data contained in the Digital Credential the attestation is related to;
```

- be non-repudiable even beyond its expiration time and even in the case of cryptographic keys rotation.

**The Issuer MUST:**

- ensure that the data contained in a Digital Credential is kept up to date, including the status of validity of the data from the Authentic Source;

> - revoke a Digital Credential when 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- revoke a Digital Credential when the following circumstances occur:
```

>   - it requires to be updated, whenever one or more attributes are changed; in this case the User will request a new issuance for that Digital Credential;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - the Digital Credential requires to be updated, whenever one or more attributes are changed; in this case the User will request a new issuance for that Digital Credential;
```

>   - the Wallet Instance to which it was issued is revoked;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - the Wallet Instance that holds the Digital Credential was issued is revoked;
```

>   - the User deletes it from the Wallet Instance;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - the User deletes the Digital Credential from the Wallet Instance;
```

  - request a revocation of that Digital Credential;
  - obtain a related Status Attestation;

- provide out-of-band mechanisms through which the User can request the revocation of their Digital Credentials, using a robust procedure for identity proofing and User authentication, in particular when the User is unable to use the personal Wallet Instance. 

**The Wallet Instance MUST:**

- check periodically the validity status of the Digital Credential that is stored in it, requesting a Status Attestation for each Digital Credential;
- be able to present a Status Attestation if required by a Verifier, along with the corresponding Digital Credential;
- request a revocation of a Digital Credential when the Users delete it from the storage. 

**The Authentic Sources MUST:**

- provide web services for the providing of updated User data and the validity status;
- store in local databases only the minimum information required to provide the Issuer with the User data or a change in the validity status.

Revocation Use Cases
--------------------

The revocation of a Digital Credential MAY be triggered by: 

- Users using their personal Wallet Instance or by some out-of-band touchpoints.

> - Revocation of the Wallet Instance

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Revocation of the Wallet Instance.
```

- Authentic Sources (e.g., for attribute updates) following administrative purposes. 
- Law-Enforcing Bodies for the fulfillment of their functions and any other judicial reasons (e.g., Police).

Credential Revocation Flows can start under different scenarios, such as:

    - The User reports the loss or theft of their own physical document to the Law-Enforcement Authorities: this implies that the Credentials, if any, shall be revoked.
    - The User notifies an Authentic Source that one or more attributes are changed (e.g. the current resident address): in this case the Credentials SHALL be revoked, as they are no longer valid due to the change in attributes. 

>     - The Users who no longer have access to their Wallet Instance (e.g. theft or loss of the device), may request the Issuer of the Credentials to revoke them or may request the Wallet Provider to revoke the Wallet Instance which in turn implies the revocation of all Digital Credentials stored in the Wallet Instance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Users who lose access to their Wallet Instance (e.g., due to theft or loss of the device) can request the Credential Issuer to revoke their Credentials or ask the Wallet Provider to revoke the Wallet Instance. If the Wallet Provider is authorized by the User and is aware of the types of Credentials and their issuers stored in the Wallet, it can then initiate the revocation of all Digital Credentials contained within the Wallet Instance on behalf of the User.
```

    - The Law-Enforcing Authorities, for the fulfillment of their functions and any other judicial reasons, may request the Authentic Source to revoke entitlements, licenses, certificates, identification documents, etc., which in turn leads to the revocation of any linked Credentials.

>     - The Authentic Sources that for any administrative reasons update one or more attributes of a User, SHALL inform the Issuer of related Credentials. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - The Authentic Sources that for any administrative reasons update one or more attributes of a User, shall inform the Issuer of related Credentials. 
```

the normative language in this chapter would be aligned with a specialized revision and pr if we agree

    - The Issuers, for technical security reasons (e.g. in the case of compromised cryptographic keys, death of the User, etc.), can decide to revoke the Credentials.

The revocation scenarios involve two main flows:

    - The **Revocation flows**: these flows describe how an Entity requests for a Digital Credential revocation. 

>     - The **Status Attestation flows**: these flows define the technical protocols for requesting and obtaining a Status Attestation and how the Wallet Instance will provide it with a Verifier as a proof of validity of a corresponding Digital Credential.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - The **Status Attestation flows**: these flows define the technical protocols for requesting and obtaining a Status Attestation and how the Wallet Instance will provide it to a Verifier as a proof of validity of a corresponding Digital Credential.
```

.. _sec_revocation_high_level_flow:

Revocation Flows
----------------

Depending on the different scenarios that may involve the revocation of a Digital Credential, different processes and technical flows may be implemented, according to national laws or Regulations of specific domains.

> The subsequent sections define the protocol interface between the Wallet Instances and the Issuers during the revocation request. The communication between the the Issuers and other Entities is out-of-scope of this technical implementation profile.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The subsequent sections define the protocol interface between the Wallet Instances and the Issuers during the revocation request. The communication between the Issuers and other Entities is out-of-scope of this technical implementation profile.
```

.. _fig_Low-Level-Flow-Revocation:
.. figure:: ../../images/Low-Level-Flow-Revocation.svg
    :figwidth: 100%
    :align: center
    :target: https://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/svg/NP31IaD134Nt-OfGNEX2t0jAmLNTTD1YDuB4zoA6JfDnal7zlkE05eMixZqdWQmzg4OxPg0MfktuoXLAZsIIGXgusbFE7BZHJkh4AoJ7HVuo6_V6TLG2i0XUtg9SOze-xl2gygST62j_DFOudohFh26KNqerUxivk_jDagNx_Uu2u6V34sMPAHZZdV74FMlwLh5FCdTs5zEJzJ0k_dD6tVjb05vCdN5x05Ypplq1Nm00
    
    Wallet Instance Initiated Revocation Flow

**Step 1 (Credential Revocation Request)**: The Wallet Instance initiates the process by creating a Credential Revocation Request. This request includes a Digital Credential Proof of Possession as a JWT. It MUST be signed with the private key related to the public key contained within the Credential (such as the Issuer Signed JWT in the case of SD-JWT, or the MSO in the case of Mdoc CBOR). Then, the Wallet Instance sends the request to the Issuer as in the following non-normative example.

.. _credential_revocation_request_ex:
.. code-block::
    
    POST /revoke HTTP/1.1
    Host: pid-provider.example.org
    Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

>     credential_proof=$CredentialPoPJWT

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    credential_pop=$CredentialPoPJWT
```

> where a non-normative example of a Credential PoP is given by the following JWT headers and payload

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Below, is given a non-normative example of a Credential PoP with decoded JWT headers and payload and without signature for better readability:
```

.. _credential_pop_jwt_ex:
.. code-block::

    {
      "alg": "ES256",

>       "typ": "revocation-request+jwt",

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      "typ": "status-attestation-request+jwt",
```

      - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 00] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-attestations/00/>`_

The Revocation Endpoint MUST be provided by the Issuer within its Metadata. 

Credential Revocation HTTP Response
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The response MUST be an HTTP Response using the status code set to *204 (No-Content)* in the case of successful revocation. If the Digital Credential could not be found by the Issuer, an HTTP Response with status code *404 (Not Found)* MUST be returned. Otherwise an HTTP error response MUST be provided by the Issuer to the Wallet Instance. This response MUST use *application/json* as the content type and MUST include the following parameters:

  - *error*. The error code.
  - *error_description*. Text in human-readable form providing further details to clarify the nature of the error encountered.

Below a non-normative example of an HTTP Response with an error.

.. code::

  HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
  Content-Type: application/json;charset=UTF-8

  {

>     "error":"invalid_request"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    "error": "invalid_request"
```

    "error_description": "The signature of credential_pop JWT is not valid"
  }

The following HTTP Status Codes and Error Codes MUST be supported:

.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 20 60
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Status Code**
      - **Error Code**
      - **Description**
    * - *400 Bad Request*
      - *invalid_request*
      - The request is not valid due to the lack or incorrectness of one or more parameters. (:rfc:`6749#section-5.2`).
    * - *500 Internal Server Error*
      - *server_error*
      - The Issuer encountered an internal problem. (:rfc:`6749#section-5.2`).
    * - *503 Service Unavailable*
      - *temporarily_unavailable*
      - The Issuer is temporary unavailable. (:rfc:`6749#section-5.2`).

Status Attestation Flows
------------------------

> The Status Attestation flows are made up of two distinct phases in time

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Status Attestation process is divided into the following phases:
```

The following diagram shows how the Wallet Instance requests a Status Attestation to the Issuer.

.. _fig_Low-Level-Flow-Status-Attestation:
.. figure:: ../../images/Low-Level-Flow-Revocation-Attestation.svg
    :figwidth: 100%
    :align: center
    :target: https://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/svg/NP11wzf04CNl-oaUqeE2shlGekZ57jfGfLw4iaacPccoa-xEAdxxpXAg_eLSPjxlJNx9EeeDalhEs2JiKrzIC8EkNEK6wmMJa-qw4kozahwY2Mp4pNrazZ4c2Zd2Mx99qfBN-UmFdCBOryUOcyFYAzmAnO_34P_rkgI8G7yJHPbMWUhSiztl8J0tNpvj7vk2Ys-duyoO_nT-sSxLLWXF1Wf1AMCyQy1N2d1p6rSujeJH5roATJwY2Tn3FV6mnIYBiy_hDEJhDQn8S6KIYh2-Hewk-TLExXZzjS1D3lAzmEdIAWbEik1cKUPIJrLhlOlzNDafBIzB9JEOMoXsttVO5Fk8U8z2_GpFhzosLFr1m-75u-n7j-ppS7cf1ChX8Rifkn6XxEdOZ_z6EGLlIlwaEB2Ff8Eq60juvzVawzHt_m00
    
    Status Attestation Request Flow

> **Step 1 (Status Attestation Request)**: The Wallet Instance sends the Status Attestation Request to the Issuer. The request MUST contain the Wallet Instance Attestation with its Proof of Possession and a Credential Proof of Possession JWT, signed  with the private key related to the public key contained within the Credential.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Step 1 (Status Attestation Request)**: The Wallet Instance sends the Status Attestation Request to the Issuer. The request MUST contain the Credential Proof of Possession JWT, signed  with the private key related to the public key contained within the Credential.
```

.. code::

    POST /status HTTP/1.1
    Host: pid-provider.example.org
    Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

>     credential_proof=$CredentialPoPJWT

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    credential_pop=$CredentialPoPJWT
```

> For a non-normative example of Credential Proof of Possession see :ref:`the one provided in the previous section <credential_pop_jwt_ex>`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A non-normative example of Credential Proof of Possession is provided :ref:`in the previous section <credential_pop_jwt_ex>`.
```

**Step 2 (PoP verification)**: The Issuer verifies the signature of the PoP JWTs using the public key that was attested in the Digital Credential, which is proof that the Wallet Instance owns the private keys associated with the Digital Credential. Therefore the Wallet Instance is entitled to request its Status Attestation.

> **Step 3 (Check for validity)**: The Issuer checks that the user's attributes are not updated by the Authentic Source or that the latter has not revoked them. The technical mechanisms for obtaining this information are out-of-scope of this technical implementation profile. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Step 3 (Check for validity)**: The Issuer checks that the User's attributes are not updated by the Authentic Source or that the latter has not revoked them. The technical mechanisms for obtaining this information are out-of-scope of this technical implementation profile. 
```

**Step 4 (Status Attestation Creation)**: The Issuer creates the corresponding Status Attestation. A non-normative example of a Status Attestation is given below.

.. code::

    {
        "alg": "ES256",

>         "typ": "non-revocation-attestation+jwt",

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        "typ": "status-attestation+jwt,
```

.. code::

    HTTP/1.1 201 OK
    Content-Type: application/json
    
    {
        "status_attestation": "eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IndhbGxldC1...",
    }

Status Attestation HTTP Request
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The requests to the *Credential status endpoint* of the Issuers MUST be HTTP with method POST, using the same mandatory parameters as in the :ref:`Table of Credential Request parameters <table_revocation_request_params>`. These MUST be encoded in ``application/x-www-form-urlencoded`` format. 

.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **credential_proof**
      - It MUST contain a signed JWT as a cryptographic proof of possession of the Digital Credential. See Section :ref:`Credential Proof of Possession <sec_revocation_credential_pop>` for more details. 
      - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 00] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-attestations/00/>`_

The *typ* value in the *credential_pop* JWT MUST be set to **status-attestation+jwt**

> The *Credential status endpoint* MUST be provided by the Issuers within their Metadata. The Issuers MUST include in the issued Digital Credentials the object *status* with the JSON member *status_attestation* set to a JSON Object containing the *credential_hash_alg* claim. It MUST contain the algorithm used for hashing the Digital Credential. Among the hash algorithms, sha-256 is RECOMMENDED.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The *Credential status endpoint* MUST be provided by the Issuers within their Metadata. The Issuers MUST include in the issued Digital Credentials the object *status* with the JSON member *status_attestation* set to a JSON Object containing the *credential_hash_alg* claim. It MUST contain the algorithm used for hashing the Digital Credential. Among the hash algorithms, the value ``sha-256`` is RECOMMENDED .
```

.. _table_http_response_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **status_attestation**
      - It MUST contain the Status Attestation as a signed JWT. 
      - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 00] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-attestations/00/>`_.

If the Digital Credential could not be found by the Issuer, an HTTP Response with status code 404 (Not Found) MUST be returned. In all other cases the Issuer MUST return an HTTP Response Error using *application/json* as the content type, and including the following parameters:

  - *error*. The error code.
  - *error_description*. Text in human-readable form that offers more details to clarify the nature of the error encountered (for instance, changes in some attributes, reasons for revocation, other).

Below a non-normative example of an HTTP Response with an error.

.. code::

  HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
  Content-Type: application/json;charset=UTF-8

  {

>     "error":"invalid_request"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    "error": "invalid_request"
```
